Education is a learning experience, where an individual learns about various aspects of life, understands the different perspectives and tries to apply it in daily life. Education is important to the children, to adults and to the society. Education gives people knowledge of the world around them and changes it into something better. It develops in people a perspective of looking at life, helps them build opinions and have points of view on things in life.

Mahatma Gandhi once quoted, "Live as if you were to die tomorrow. Learn as if you were to live forever." This portrays the importance of education and learning in one's life.

If a child is joined in a school, he will start learning, playing and enjoy with friends. While learning he will understand what position he is in acquiring knowledge and he will learn slowly to grab the top position. While playing he will understand the logic to win it; this way they start building goals at an early stage. But parents should understand whether their children are working only for ranks and grades or acquiring some wisdom or not. It is important that they are aware of the purpose of education and how it works in real life. They start maintaining a structured life.

To an individual, education increases the level of confidence as it makes a person aware about his/her surroundings. It also helps an individual to communicate better and express his/her opinions. The mind gets matured by proper education and training. A person can judge what is right and what is not.  Education makes a person independent and helps him abide by the rules of the land. Education improves the standard of living of the people. It helps people understand their needs and gives them the way to acquire them. Education provides a platform for a decent livelihood. One can take up a job in industry or another professional service if he/she is educated.

Advances in medicine, war equipment, technology were possible due to constant exploration and research. People of current age carry this exploration. They could do so due to their education and knowledge about the past technology. People with higher education in science, mathematics, and technology can do this. The food production, medicine, electronic gadgets, automobiles and other luxury items were developed due to the spread of science and technology among the professionals through studies.

To be a better human, an active participant in society and to gain respect from the world one should always learn new things. Learning new things in education.

